.\" lime_grammar.5 - manual page for the Lime grammar file format
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Lime Parser Generator Project
.\" Public Domain
.\"
.TH LIME_GRAMMAR 5 "June 2026" "Lime 0.12.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
lime_grammar \- Lime parser generator grammar file format
.SH DESCRIPTION
A Lime grammar file defines the syntax of a language using production
rules and configuration directives.
Lime reads this file and generates an LALR(1) parser in C.
.PP
Grammar files conventionally use the
.B .lime
file extension.
A grammar file consists of:
.IP \(bu 2
Directive declarations (lines beginning with
.BR % )
.IP \(bu 2
Production rules
.IP \(bu 2
C\-language comments
.RB ( "/* ... */" )
.SH "PRODUCTION RULES"
A production rule defines how a non-terminal symbol is constructed
from a sequence of terminal and non-terminal symbols.
The general form is:
.PP
.RS
.EX
lhs(A) ::= sym1(B) sym2(C) sym3. { A = f(B, C); }
.EE
.RE
.PP
.TP
.I lhs
The non-terminal being defined (left-hand side).
Non-terminal names begin with a lowercase letter.
.TP
.I sym1, sym2, sym3
The right-hand side symbols.
Terminal symbols begin with an uppercase letter.
Non-terminal symbols begin with a lowercase letter.
.TP
.I (A), (B), (C)
Optional aliases that name the semantic value of each symbol
for use in the action code.
.TP
.BI "{ " "C code" " }"
An optional semantic action executed when the rule is reduced.
Inside the action, aliases refer to the semantic values of the
corresponding symbols.
.IP
Alias substitution is
.B lexically aware:
identifiers that match an alias are rewritten to stack-slot
references only in code positions.
Occurrences inside string literals
.RB ( "\"...\"" ),
character literals
.RB ( "'...'" ),
line comments
.RB ( // ),
and block comments
.RB ( /*\ ...\ */ )
are preserved verbatim.
C backslash escapes inside string and character literals are
honored, so embedded
.B \\\"
or
.B \\'
sequences do not prematurely close the literal.
.PP
Every rule must be terminated by a period
.RB ( . ).
.PP
A rule may specify an explicit precedence by appending a
bracket-enclosed terminal symbol before the action:
.PP
.RS
.EX
expr(A) ::= MINUS expr(B). [UMINUS] { A = -B; }
.EE
.RE
.PP
This assigns the rule the precedence of
.B UMINUS
instead of the default (rightmost terminal).
.SH DIRECTIVES
All directives begin with a
.B %
character.
.SS "Parser Configuration"
.TP
.BI %name " identifier"
Set the prefix for generated parser functions.
The default is
.BR Parse ,
so the generated functions are named
.BR ParseAlloc ,
.BR ParseFree ,
.BR Parse ,
and
.BR ParseTrace .
With
.BR "%name Calc" ,
they become
.BR CalcAlloc ,
.BR CalcFree ,
etc.
.TP
.BI %token_type " {C-type}"
Declare the C data type for terminal symbol values (tokens).
This is the type of the third argument to the parser function.
Example:
.BR "%token_type {int}" .
.TP
.BI %default_type " {C-type}"
Declare the default C data type for non-terminal symbol values.
Non-terminals without an explicit
.B %type
declaration use this type.
.TP
.BI %type " symbol {C-type}"
Declare the C data type for a specific non-terminal's semantic
value.
Example:
.BR "%type expr {int}" .
.TP
.BI %extra_argument " {C-declaration}"
Declare an extra argument passed to the parser function on each
call.
This is commonly a pointer to an application context structure.
Example:
.BR "%extra_argument {ParseState *state}" .
.TP
.BI %extra_context " {C-declaration}"
Declare an extra context stored in the parser object, set once
during allocation.
Unlike
.BR %extra_argument ,
this value persists across calls.
.TP
.BI %start_symbol " symbol"
Declare the start symbol of the grammar.
By default, the left-hand side of the first production rule is
the start symbol.
.TP
.BI %token_prefix " prefix"
Prepend
.I prefix
to all token
.B #define
names in the generated header file.
Useful to avoid name collisions.
For example,
.B "%token_prefix TK_"
causes the token
.B INTEGER
to be defined as
.BR TK_INTEGER .
.TP
.BI %stack_size " N"
Set the initial parser stack depth to
.IR N .
The stack grows automatically if needed.
The default is typically sufficient for most grammars.
.TP
.BI %stack_size_limit " N"
Set the maximum parser stack depth to
.IR N .
If the stack reaches this limit, a stack overflow error is triggered.
.SS "Include and Code Blocks"
.TP
.B %include
.BI { " C code " }
Insert C code at the top of the generated parser source file.
Typically used for
.B #include
directives and type definitions.
.TP
.B %code
.BI { " C code " }
Insert C code into the generated parser source, after the
include section.
.SS "Precedence and Associativity"
Precedence is declared from lowest to highest.
Each directive defines a new precedence level.
Symbols listed on the same directive share the same level and
associativity.
.TP
.BI %left " sym1 sym2 " ...
Declare
.IR sym1 , " sym2" , " ..."
as left-associative at a new precedence level.
.TP
.BI %right " sym1 sym2 " ...
Declare
.IR sym1 , " sym2" , " ..."
as right-associative at a new precedence level.
.TP
.BI %nonassoc " sym1 sym2 " ...
Declare
.IR sym1 , " sym2" , " ..."
as non-associative at a new precedence level.
Non-associative operators cause a parse error when two appear
at the same level without explicit grouping.
.SS "Token Declarations"
.TP
.BI %token " name" .
Declare a terminal symbol.
Token declarations are optional but influence the order of
token code assignment in the generated header.
.TP
.BI %token_class " name sym1 sym2 " ...
Define a token class: a named group of terminal symbols that
can be used as a single symbol in production rules.
.TP
.BI %fallback " first_token token1 token2 " ...
Declare that if
.IR token1 , " token2" , " ..."
cause a syntax error, the parser should retry with
.I first_token
instead.
This is useful for handling context-sensitive keywords.
.TP
.BI %wildcard " token" .
Declare
.I token
as a wildcard that matches any token not otherwise handled
by the parser in the current state.
.SS "Error Handling"
.TP
.B %syntax_error
.BI { " C code " }
C code to execute when a syntax error is detected.  The following
identifiers are available inside the block:
.RS
.TP
.B yymajor
Token code (int) of the offending lookahead token.
.TP
.B yyminor
The token's semantic value (type set by
.BR %token_type ).
The alias
.B TOKEN
also refers to this value.
.TP
.B TOKEN_LOC
Source location of the token (type
.BR YYLOCATIONTYPE ,
typically
.BR LimeLocation ).
Only defined when
.B %locations
is in effect.
.TP
.B yypParser
Opaque parser handle (void*) that can be passed to the
introspection functions
.BR Parse ,
.BR ParseState ,
and
.BR ParseExpectedTokens
to build rich diagnostics.  See the "Diagnostics API"
section below.
.RE
.sp
Example:
.RS
.nf
%syntax_error {
    fprintf(stderr, "error near %s\\n",
            ParseTokenName(yymajor));
    int s = ParseState(yypParser);
    int n = ParseExpectedTokens(s, NULL, 0);
    int *codes = malloc(n * sizeof(int));
    ParseExpectedTokens(s, codes, n);
    fprintf(stderr, "  expected one of:");
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        fprintf(stderr, " %s", ParseTokenName(codes[i]));
    }
    fprintf(stderr, "\\n");
    free(codes);
}
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B %parse_failure
.BI { " C code " }
C code to execute when the parser fails completely (cannot
recover from a syntax error).
.TP
.B %parse_accept
.BI { " C code " }
C code to execute when the input is successfully parsed.
.TP
.B %stack_overflow
.BI { " C code " }
C code to execute if the parser stack overflows.
.TP
.BI %error_sync " N"
Configure error recovery behavior.
.BI %expect " N"
Declare the expected number of parsing conflicts.
If exactly
.I N
conflicts are found,
.B lime
exits with status 0.
This suppresses conflict warnings when conflicts are intentional.
.SS Destructors
.TP
.BI %destructor " symbol { C code }"
Declare C code to execute when a value of type
.I symbol
is popped from the parser stack without being used in a
reduction action.
This is essential for freeing dynamically allocated semantic
values to prevent memory leaks.
.TP
.B %token_destructor
.BI { " C code " }
Declare a default destructor for all terminal symbols.
.TP
.B %default_destructor
.BI { " C code " }
Declare a default destructor for all non-terminal symbols that
do not have a specific
.B %destructor
declaration.
.SS "Memory Management"
.TP
.BI %realloc " function"
Specify the memory reallocation function used by the generated
parser for stack growth.
The default is
.BR realloc (3).
.TP
.BI %free " function"
Specify the memory deallocation function used by the generated
parser.
The default is
.BR free (3).
.SS "Location Tracking"
.TP
.B %locations
Enable source location tracking in the parser.
When enabled, each token and non-terminal carries location
information that can be used for error reporting.
A grammar that declares
.B %locations
must use
.BR ParseLoc ()
(or its renamed equivalent under
.BR %name_prefix )
to feed tokens; locations are stored in
.B yyStackEntry.yyloc
and can be read in actions via the
.B @
macros described below.
.TP
.BI %location_type " {" " type " "}"
Declare the C type used to carry locations.
The default is
.B LimeLocation
(a {start, end} byte-offset struct).
Grammars typically override this -- for example, to use a single
.B int
byte offset (PostgreSQL's YYLTYPE convention) or a string for
source-text accumulation (PostgreSQL's ecpg preprocessor).
The declared type becomes
.BR YYLOCATIONTYPE .
.TP
.B Location aliases in actions
Within an action body the following macros expand to stack-slot
location reads:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B @<rhsalias>
-- the location of the i-th RHS symbol whose alias was declared in
the rule head (e.g.
.BR "e(E) ::= a(X) PLUS b(Y)." " -- @X, @Y)."
.IP \(bu 2
.B "@$"
or
.B "@<lhsalias>"
-- the location of the LHS slot.  Inside an action body these
bind to a per-reduce local that holds the LHS location.  Lime
populates the local before the action runs (via
.B YYLLOC_DEFAULT
when defined, or the built-in default otherwise) and commits
it to the LHS slot after the action returns.  An action body
can read the default and/or write the local via
.BI "@$ = " expr ;
the written value is what survives.  This matches Bison's
documented ordering.
.RE
.TP
.BI "#define YYLLOC_DEFAULT(" "Current" ", " "Rhs" ", " "N" )\| ...
.PD 0
.TP
.B Location override
Define the macro in the grammar's
.B %include
block (or in any header included therein) to override Lime's
built-in location-inheritance rule on every reduce.
Semantics match Bison's documented contract:
.PD
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.I Current
is an lvalue of type
.BR YYLOCATIONTYPE ;
assign the LHS location to it.
.IP \(bu 2
.I Rhs
is a 0-indexed array of
.BR YYLOCATIONTYPE .
.RI Rhs[ i ]
for
.IR i " = 1.." N
is the i-th RHS symbol's location.
.B Rhs[0]
is the location of the slot below the rule on the parser stack
(used for the empty-rule fallback).
.IP \(bu 2
.I N
is the number of RHS symbols (0 for empty rules).
.IP \(bu 2
.BI YYRHSLOC( Rhs , " K" )
is provided as
.BI (( Rhs )[ K ])
so user macros that follow Bison's documented YYRHSLOC indirection
also work unmodified.
.RE
.IP
When the macro is
.I not
defined, Lime applies its built-in rule: for non-empty rules the
LHS yyloc is
.B Rhs[1]
(via slot reuse), for empty rules it is the lookahead's location.
.IP
The array is stack-allocated per reduce, sized to fit the longest
RHS in the grammar (
.BR YYNRHS_MAX ,
emitted by
.BR lime ).
No VLA is used.
.IP
.B Note
on timing: Lime evaluates
.B YYLLOC_DEFAULT
after the action body, then assigns the result to the LHS slot.
Bison evaluates it before the action body and stages it in
.IR yyloc .
This is observable when an action body reads
.B "@$"
;
see the alias documentation above.
.SS "Preprocessor Directives"
.TP
.BI %ifdef " macro"
Begin a conditional section.
The enclosed grammar text is included only if
.I macro
was defined with the
.B \-D
command-line option.
.TP
.BI %ifndef " macro"
Begin a conditional section that is included only if
.I macro
is
.I not
defined.
.TP
.B %endif
End a conditional section started by
.B %ifdef
or
.BR %ifndef .
.SS "AST Generation"
.TP
.BI %ast_prefix " prefix"
Set the prefix for automatically generated AST node types.
.TP
.BI %ast_node " symbol { members }"
Define an AST node type for a non-terminal.
.TP
.BI %ast_list " symbol { member-type }"
Define an AST list node type for a non-terminal.
.TP
.B %ast_auto
Enable automatic generation of AST construction code in
reduction actions.
.SS "Module Directives"
These directives support modular grammar development, where a
large grammar is split into multiple files that are composed
together.
.TP
.BI %module_name " identifier"
Declare the module name for this grammar file.
Must be alphanumeric with underscores.
If present,
.B %module_version
is required.
.TP
.BI %module_version " \(dqmajor.minor.patch\(dq"
Declare the module version using semantic versioning.
.TP
.BI %module_description " \(dqdescription\(dq"
Optional human-readable description of the module.
.TP
.BI %require " module" " " \fR[\fIversion-constraint\fR]\fB.
Declare a dependency on another module.
The version constraint is optional and supports operators:
.BR >= ", " <= ", " > ", " < ", " == .
Example:
.BR "%require base \(dq>= 1.0.0\(dq." .
.TP
.BI %export " sym1 sym2 " ...\fB.\fR
Declare non-terminal symbols exported by this module for use
by other modules.
.TP
.BI %import " sym1 sym2 " ... " from " module\fB.\fR
Import symbols (terminal or non-terminal) from another module.
.SS "Dialect-Conditional Blocks"
.TP
.BI %dialect " NAME
.BI { " body " }
Generator-time conditional rule block.
The body is included verbatim when the macro
.BI dialect_ NAME
is defined at
.B lime
invocation time (typically via the
.BI \-Ddialect= NAME
CLI shorthand);
when it is not defined, the entire region is removed.
.IP
.B %dialect
is sugar over
.BI "%ifdef dialect_" NAME
.B { body } %endif
with brace-scoped (rather than
.BR %endif -terminated)
body syntax.
The brace scan is string- and comment-aware: a
.B }
inside
.BR "\"...\"" ,
.BR '...' ,
.BR "/* ... */" ,
or
.B "// ..."
does not close the block.
Newlines are preserved in either branch so downstream error
messages carry the correct line number.
.IP
Locked design rules:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.I NAME
must match
.BR [A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]* .
.IP \(bu 2
A missing brace, an unterminated body, or a nested
.B %dialect
inside another
.B %dialect
is a hard error with file-and-line diagnostics.
.IP \(bu 2
.B %dialect
blocks share the same token namespace as the rest of the
grammar; two blocks declaring the same
.B %token
dedup, but conflicting
.B %type
annotations fail LALR construction the same way they would
outside any
.B %dialect
block.
.IP \(bu 2
Multiple
.BI \-Ddialect= X
.BI \-Ddialect= Y
compose: both bodies are included.
There is no umbrella
.B dialect
macro.
.RE
.IP
v0.4.0.  Worked example, design constraints, and the
idempotence guarantee live in
.B docs/DIALECT.md .
.SS "File-Level Inheritance"
.TP
.BI %extends " \(dqpath\(dq
Load and merge another grammar file at parser-generation time.
The base file's rules, tokens, types,
.B %include
blocks, and other directives are absorbed into the deriving
grammar before code generation.
.B %extends
may appear multiple times (the
.I diamond
pattern); the diamond convergence rules below resolve which
body, type, or override wins.
.IP
Path resolution:
.RS
.IP 1. 4
Absolute path if the string starts with
.BR / .
.IP 2. 4
Relative to the directory of the file containing the
.B %extends
directive.
.IP 3. 4
Entries of the
.B LIME_PATH
environment variable, colon-separated, in order.
.RE
.IP
The current working directory is intentionally
.I not
searched (it shifts under build systems).
Resolution failure and
.B %extends
cycles are hard errors.
.IP
.B "Diamond / convergence rules"
(see
.B docs/EXTENDS.md
for full worked examples):
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Rule identity is
.BR ( LHS_name ,
.IR RHS_symbol_sequence ).
Alias names, action body, and precedence mark are not part of
identity, so
.B %override
and
.B %remove
match on rule shape regardless of how aliases are spelled.
.IP \(bu 2
If two
.B %extends
paths overlap (oracle.lime and mysql.lime each
.B %extends
ansi_sql.lime), re-loads of identical rules silently dedup.
.IP \(bu 2
If two paths
.B %override
the same rule with different bodies and the deriving file does
not itself disambiguate, Lime errors with
"diamond inheritance conflict"
and a hint to add an
.B %override
in the derived file.
.IP \(bu 2
A shallower-depth
.B %override
or
.B %remove
in the deriving file unconditionally wins over deeper sibling
decisions.
.IP \(bu 2
.B %include
blocks concatenate in DFS order: base file first, then
derived files in the order they appear.
.RE
.IP
v0.4.1.
.TP
.B %override
.I rule
Replace a base file's rule body by identity match.
The directive precedes a normal rule declaration; only the
action body changes -- the rule identity
.RB ( "(LHS, RHS)" )
must already exist in the inherited grammar.
A missing target is a hard error
("%override: no rule of matching identity to override").
Example:
.RS
.PP
.EX
%extends "ansi_sql.lime"
%override
select_clause(R) ::= SELECT STAR FROM IDENT.   { R = oracle_sel(); }
.EE
.RE
.IP
v0.4.1.
.TP
.BI %remove " rule-shape" .
Drop a rule from the inherited grammar by identity match.
No action body; the directive ends at the rule's terminating
.BR . .
If the target does not exist, the response depends on the build:
.B LIME_STRICT
builds (auto-defined for meson
.BR buildtype=debug " / " debugoptimized )
error; release builds warn to stderr and continue.
Downstream pinned grammars frequently outlive a base file's
exact rule shape, which is why the soft default exists; CI runs
built with
.B LIME_STRICT
catch the drift early.  v0.4.1.
.TP
.BI %override_type " symbol\fR { \fIC-type\fR }
Widen a base file's
.B %type
declaration for
.IR symbol .
When this actually changes the inherited type, Lime prints a
noisy stderr warning of the form
.RS
.PP
.EX
file.lime:NN: warning: %override_type widens SYM from existing
  type; user-responsibility ABI compat
.EE
.PP
.RE
.IP
The warning is intentional.
The author is asserting that the new type is ABI-compatible
with the prior type wherever the generated parser already uses
it; Lime cannot verify the assertion.
v0.4.1.  See
.B docs/EXTENDS.md
for the ten locked design rules.
.SS "Embedded Grammar Wiring"
.TP
.BI %embed " NAME " \fBTRIGGER\fP \(aq\fIlex\fP\(aq \fBENTRY_TOKEN\fP " TOK" .
Declare a runtime grammar-mode boundary.
When the host parser sees the trigger lexeme
.I lex
in a position that admits the entry-point terminal
.IR TOK ,
the runtime context-switch machinery enters the embedded
sub-grammar registered under
.IR NAME .
The directive is pure sugar over
.B context_switch_register_trigger()
(see
.BR docs/CONTEXT_SWITCH.md ):
it emits the
.IB Prefix _embed_table[]
and the
.IB Prefix SetEmbedSnapshot()
/
.IB Prefix RegisterEmbedTriggers()
helpers in the generated
.IB basename _snapshot.c
(only when
.B \-n
is active).
.IP
Fields:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.I NAME
-- mode-label identifier; used as the runtime
.B mode_name
string.
.IP \(bu 2
.RI \(aq lex \(aq
-- single- or double-quoted trigger lexeme; non-empty
free-form bytes.  The formatter
.RB ( \-F )
normalises to single quotes on emit.
.IP \(bu 2
.I TOK
-- entry-point lookahead terminal; must already be declared
via
.BR %token .
.RE
.IP
Multiple
.B %embed
directives compose; each registers one trigger, in declaration
order.  Without
.BR \-n ,
.B lime
warns that the directive's effect is dropped (the snapshot
file, where the wiring lives, is not emitted).
v0.4.4.  See
.B docs/EMBED.md .
.SH SYMBOL NAMING
.IP \(bu 2
Terminal symbols (tokens) must start with an uppercase letter.
.IP \(bu 2
Non-terminal symbols must start with a lowercase letter.
.IP \(bu 2
The special symbol
.B error
is a non-terminal used for error recovery.
When the parser encounters a syntax error, it pops states until
it finds one where
.B error
is a valid lookahead, then shifts the
.B error
symbol and continues parsing.
.SH COMMENTS
C-style comments
.RB ( "/* ... */" )
and C++-style line comments
.RB ( "// ..." )
may appear anywhere in the grammar file outside of action code blocks.
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal calculator grammar:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%name Calc
%token_type {int}
%type expr {int}
%extra_argument {int *result}

%include {
#include <stdio.h>
}

%syntax_error {
    fprintf(stderr, "syntax error\\n");
}

%token PLUS MINUS TIMES DIVIDE INTEGER.

%left PLUS MINUS.
%left TIMES DIVIDE.

%start_symbol program

program ::= expr(A). { *result = A; }

expr(A) ::= expr(B) PLUS expr(C).   { A = B + C; }
expr(A) ::= expr(B) MINUS expr(C).  { A = B \- C; }
expr(A) ::= expr(B) TIMES expr(C).  { A = B * C; }
expr(A) ::= expr(B) DIVIDE expr(C). { A = B / C; }
expr(A) ::= INTEGER(B).             { A = B; }
.EE
.RE
.PP
Using fallback tokens for context-sensitive keywords:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%fallback ID ABORT ACTION AFTER ANALYZE.
.EE
.RE
.PP
This means that if ABORT, ACTION, AFTER, or ANALYZE cause a
syntax error in context, the parser retries with ID.
.PP
Using preprocessor conditionals:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%ifdef ENABLE_JSON
json_expr(A) ::= expr(B) ARROW expr(C). { A = json_get(B, C); }
%endif
.EE
.RE
.PP
A modular grammar file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%module_name expr
%module_version "1.0.0"
%module_description "Expression grammar"

%require base ">= 1.0.0".
%export a_expr b_expr.
%import IDENT INTEGER from base.

%type a_expr {Node*}

a_expr(A) ::= a_expr(B) PLUS a_expr(C). {
    A = make_binop('+', B, C);
}
a_expr(A) ::= INTEGER(B). {
    A = make_int(B);
}
.EE
.RE
.SH "GLR MODE"
Lime ships an opt-in Generalized-LR (GLR) parsing engine
alongside the default LALR(1) push parser.
GLR handles grammars that LALR(1) cannot, by forking the parse
stack on shift/reduce or reduce/reduce conflicts and continuing
all alternatives in parallel through a Graph-Structured Stack;
heads that converge to the same state are merged.  When two
reductions produce the same nonterminal at the same position, a
user-supplied disambiguation callback picks the winner.  If
none picks, the parse reports unresolvable ambiguity.
.PP
The GLR entry point is
.PP
.RS
.EX
int lime_parse_glr(ParseContext *ctx,
                   GLRDisambiguateFn cb, void *user);
.EE
.RE
.PP
declared in
.BR <glr.h> .
Grammars need no syntactic markup to opt in; the same
Lime-generated snapshot supports both modes.  Callers that
never call
.B lime_parse_glr()
pay zero cost for GLR support being present in the runtime --
the LALR fast path
.RB ( src/parse_engine.c ,
.BR src/snapshot.c ,
.BR src/jit_codegen.c )
is byte-identical to the pre-GLR tree.  Measured GLR overhead
vs LALR on unambiguous input is 5--8\(mu (see
.BR docs/GLR.md ).
v0.3.4.
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS API"
.PP
Every Lime-generated parser exports three functions that enable
rich error reporting (Rust-compiler-style caret underlines and
"expected one of ..." hints).  All three are renameable via the
.B %name
directive or the
.B \-P
command-line flag.
.TP
.BI "const char *" ParseTokenName( "int tokenCode" );
Return the string name of a terminal token code, or
.B NULL
if the code is out of range.
.TP
.BI "int " ParseState( "void *parser" );
Return the current parser state number, or
.B \-1
if the handle is invalid.  A freshly-initialized parser is in state 0.
The return value is meaningful only as an input to
.BR ParseExpectedTokens .
.TP
.BI "int " ParseExpectedTokens( "int stateno" ", int *" out ", int " max );
Fill
.I out
with the token codes that are valid at
.IR stateno
and return the count written (up to
.IR max ).
If
.I out
is
.B NULL
or
.I max
is 0, returns the count that would have been written so the caller
can size a buffer and call again.  Token codes are returned in
ascending numeric order and can be passed to
.B ParseTokenName
to obtain human-readable names.
.PP
There is also a string-returning helper for quick use:
.TP
.BI "char *" ParseExpectedTokensString( "void *parser" );
Return a heap-allocated comma-separated list of expected token
names at the parser's current state (e.g.,
.BR """SELECT,""\ INSERT,\ UPDATE"" ).
The caller must
.BR free (3)
the result.
.SH "BISON-COMPATIBILITY API"
.PP
Functions that exist to ease porting from Bison-generated parsers.
All renameable via the
.B %name_prefix
directive.
.TP
.BI "int " Parse_get_lookahead( "void *parser" ", " "ParseTOKENTYPE *value" " [, " "YYLOCATIONTYPE *loc" "]" );
.PD 0
.TP
.BI "void " Parse_clear_lookahead( "void *parser" );
.PD
Action-body access to the parser's pending lookahead.  Equivalent
to Bison's
.BR yychar " / " yyclearin .
Returns
.B YYEMPTY
(-2) when no
.B Parse()
call is in progress.  Used by grammars where an empty production
needs to consume the lookahead and pull further tokens from the
lexer itself (PostgreSQL plpgsql is the motivating example).
P0-NEW-5.
.TP
.BI "void " Parse_drain( "void *parser" );
Fire any pending default reduces eagerly, matching Bison's pull-mode
timing.  In Lime's push-mode, after
.B Parse()
shifts a token the parser may be in a state whose only available
next action is a reduce.  By default Lime waits for the next
.B Parse()
call to confirm the reduce; this opt-in primitive forces the
reduce to fire now.  Useful for drivers whose action bodies have
side effects (writing to an output stream, mutating shared state)
that must precede the lexer's next side effects.  PostgreSQL ecpg
is the motivating example.  Loops until the top of stack is in a
state that requires a real lookahead, the parser accepts, or
encounters an error.  Safe to call between
.B Parse()
invocations and idempotent past quiescence.  Action bodies fired
during drain see no lookahead
.RB ( Parse_get_lookahead
returns
.BR YYEMPTY ).
P0-NEW-8.
.SH "RUST OUTPUT"
The
.B \-\-rust
flag on
.BR lime (1)
emits a self-contained Rust mirror of the parser alongside the
C output.  The Rust output is additive -- the C path is
unchanged; both
.B .c
and
.B .rs
fall out of one
.B lime
invocation.  Rust-specific grammar directives let action bodies
and types diverge from the C side when needed:
.TP
.B %rust_action { code }
Per-rule Rust action body override.  Placed AFTER the rule's
existing C
.B { ... }
body, attaches to the most-recent rule.  When emitting the
Rust output the rule's
.B yy_rule_<N>
function uses this body verbatim instead of
B$P-substituting the C body.  Lets the same rule have
different semantics in C and Rust, or lets the user write
Rust-specific syntax (Result, ?, pattern match) that doesn't
translate from C.
.TP
.BI "%rust_extra_argument {" "Type" }
Rust analog of
.BR %extra_argument .
Sets the Parser struct's
.B user
field type and threads it as
.B "&mut Type"
into every reduce callback's
.BR ReduceCtx .
Default
.B "()"
when the directive is omitted.
.TP
.BI "%rust_value_type {" "Type" }
Override the semantic Value type in Rust output.  Default
.BR i64 .
Use for grammars whose semantic values aren't integers --
.BR String ", " "Box<dyn Any>" ", " "struct" ,
etc.  The C side is unaffected; per-symbol typing on the C side
goes through
.BR %type ", " %token_type
which Rust output silently ignores.
.TP
.B %rust_syntax_error { code }
.PD 0
.TP
.B %rust_parse_accept { code }
.TP
.B %rust_parse_failure { code }
.TP
.B %rust_stack_overflow { code }
.PD
Optional Rust-side parse-event hooks.  Each emits as a method
on the
.B XParser
impl block; the body has access to
.B "&mut self"
plus
.RB ( "_token: u16" ", " "_state: u16" )
on
.BR on_syntax_error .
Default no-op when the directive is omitted.  These are the
Rust analogs of
.BR %syntax_error ", " %parse_accept ", " %parse_failure ", " %stack_overflow ;
the C side keeps its own bodies independently.
.SH "RUST API"
The generated
.B .rs
exposes:
.TP
.B "pub struct XParser"
The parser, named
.B X
+
.B Parser
where X comes from
.BR %name .
Has fields
.BR stack ", " final_value " (the start-rule's value, populated"
on accept), and
.BR user " (the " %rust_extra_argument
slot).
.TP
.B "pub fn new() -> Self"
.PD 0
.TP
.BI "pub fn new_with_user(user: " UserArg ") -> Self"
.PD
Construction.  The
.B Default
bound on
.B new()
is implicit when
.B UserArg = ()
or another type with
.BR Default ;
otherwise use
.BR new_with_user .
.TP
.BI "pub fn push(&mut self, token_code: u16, value: " Value ") -> Result<bool, ParseError>"
Feed an external token code (with FIRST_TOKEN offset already
applied per the
.B pub const
constants emitted alongside).  Returns
.B Ok(true)
on accept,
.B Ok(false)
on accept-pending,
.B Err(...)
on parse error or out-of-range token.
.TP
.B "pub fn finalize(&mut self) -> Result<bool, ParseError>"
Equivalent to
.BR push(0, Value::default()) .
.PP
See
.B docs/RUST_OUTPUT.md
for the complete reference,
.B docs/RUST_BENCHMARK.md
for performance measurements, and
.B examples/rust_calc/
for an end-to-end Cargo example.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lime (1),
.BR lime_lex (5),
.BR lime-lsp (1),
.BR yacc (1),
.BR bison (1)
.PP
Further documentation in the source tree:
.B docs/DIALECT.md ,
.B docs/EXTENDS.md ,
.B docs/EMBED.md ,
.B docs/DIFF_CONFLICTS.md ,
.B docs/LINT.md ,
.B docs/GLR.md ,
.B docs/LSP.md ,
.B docs/CONTEXT_SWITCH.md ,
.B docs/MODULE_FORMAT.md .
.SH AUTHORS
The Lemon parser generator was originally written by D. Richard Hipp
for the SQLite project.
Lime is an extended version of Lemon with support for modular
grammars, runtime extensions, and additional code generation features.
.SH LICENSE
Public Domain.
