.\" lime_lex.5 - manual page for the Lime lexer file format
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Lime Parser Generator Project
.\" Public Domain
.\"
.TH LIME_LEX 5 "May 2026" "Lime 1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
lime_lex \- Lime parser generator lexer file format
.SH DESCRIPTION
A Lime lexer file defines a scanner: a state machine that consumes
a stream of bytes and emits a stream of tokens.
The compiled lexer is push-driven, reentrant, and pairs with a
Lime-generated parser by feeding tokens to its
.BR ParseLoc ()
entry point.
.PP
Lexer files conventionally use the
.B .lex
file extension and are processed with
.B "lime \-X"
to produce
.IB stem _lex.c
and
.IB stem _lex.h
in the directory specified by the
.B \-d
flag (default: current directory).
.PP
A lexer file consists of:
.IP \(bu 2
Directive declarations (lines beginning with
.BR % )
.IP \(bu 2
Rule definitions
.RB ( "rule " name " matches " /pattern/ " { " action " }" )
.IP \(bu 2
C\-language and C++\-style comments
.RB ( "/* ... */" " and " "// ..." )
outside action and code blocks.
.SH "RULE SYNTAX"
A rule defines what input pattern fires which action.
The general form is:
.PP
.RS
.EX
[<state-list>] rule name matches /pattern/ { action }
.EE
.RE
.PP
.TP
.I <state-list>
Optional state qualifier.
When present, the rule fires only when the lexer is in one of
the listed states.
The list is comma\-separated:
.B <xq>
or
.BR "<xq, xqc, xe>" .
When absent, the rule fires in
.BR INITIAL .
.TP
.I name
A stable identifier used in the generated rule\-id constant
.RI ( <PREFIX> _RULE_ <UPPER_NAME> ),
in trace output, and in introspection.
Required.
.TP
.IB / pattern /
A POSIX\-extended regex.
Patterns are delimited by
.B /
characters (no embedded
.B /
allowed; use
.BR \e/ ).
Named pattern fragments declared by
.B %pattern
are referenced as
.BI { name } .
.TP
.BI { " action " }
A C action body executed when the pattern matches.
Inside the body, several typed locals and macros are
available; see
.B "ACTION BODY"
below.
An empty action body
.RB ( "{ }" )
auto\-emits the matched rule\-id to the user's emit callback;
this is the most common form for tokens with no transformation.
.PP
A state\-block shorthand groups many rules under one state
qualifier:
.PP
.RS
.EX
<EXPR> {
    rule plus  matches /\e+/  { LEX_EMIT('+'); }
    rule minus matches /-/    { LEX_EMIT('-'); }
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
The block desugars to per\-rule
.B <EXPR>
qualifiers; block\-form and per\-rule forms can be interleaved
freely in the same file.
.PP
A rule whose pattern is the literal token
.B <<EOF>>
fires when the input ends in the qualifying state(s).
End\-of\-input rules in
.B INITIAL
state are written without a qualifier.
.SH DIRECTIVES
All directives begin with a
.B %
character and end with a period
.RB ( . ).
.SS "Lexer Configuration"
.TP
.BI %name_prefix " identifier" .
Set the prefix for generated lexer functions and types.
The default is
.BR Lex ,
producing
.BR LexAlloc ,
.BR LexFree ,
.BR LexFeedBytes ,
.BR LexFeedEOF ,
and the
.B Lex_Lexer
opaque struct.
With
.BR "%name_prefix Foo." ,
they become
.BR FooLexAlloc ,
.BR FooLexFree ,
.BR Foo_Lexer ,
etc.
The same prefix governs the
.BR _RULE_ *
and
.BR _STATE_ *
constants in upper case (so
.B Foo
yields
.BR FOO_RULE_IDENT ,
.BR FOO_STATE_INITIAL ).
.TP
.BI %token_prefix " identifier" .
Prepend
.I prefix
to all token
.B #define
names emitted to the generated header (when the lexer also
emits parser\-side glue; not used for plain
.B \-X
output).
.TP
.BI %token_type " {" " C-type " "}"
Declare the C data type of a token's emitted value (the
third argument to the emit callback).
The default is implicit
.B "void *"
through the type\-erased
.BR text / len
form of the callback.
.TP
.BI %location_type " {" " C-type " "}"
Declare the C type used to carry locations.
The default is
.BR LimeLocation ,
matching the parser's default.
.TP
.BI %lexer_extra_argument " {" " C-declaration " "}"
Declare an opaque per\-instance user pointer.
Read inside any action body as the
.B extra
local.
The pointer is set by
.BR LexAlloc ()
and is the lexer\-side analogue of the parser's
.BR %extra_argument .
.SS "Pattern Fragments"
.TP
.BI %pattern " name " /regex/ .
Declare a named regex fragment.
References inside any rule's
.IB / pattern /
body as
.BI { name } .
Fragments may reference other fragments recursively; cycles
are detected at parse time and reported as errors.
Forward references are allowed.
Replaces the flex definitions section.
.IP
Example:
.RS
.EX
%pattern digit       /[0\-9]/.
%pattern hex         /[0\-9A\-Fa\-f]/.
%pattern ident_start /[A\-Za\-z_]/.
%pattern ident       /{ident_start}[A\-Za\-z_0\-9]*/.
.EE
.RE
.SS "State Declarations"
.TP
.BI %state " name" .
Declare an inclusive state.
Rules without a state qualifier match in inclusive states
in addition to
.BR INITIAL .
.TP
.BI %exclusive_state " name" .
Declare an exclusive state.
Only rules qualified
.BI < name >
fire while the lexer is in this state.
.TP
.BI %state " name " { " typed-body " }.
.PD 0
.TP
.BI %exclusive_state " name " { " typed-body " }.
.PD
Declare a state with typed local data.
The body is C struct\-member syntax:
.RS
.EX
%exclusive_state DOLLAR_QUOTED {
    char    *opening_tag;
    size_t   opening_tag_len;
}.
.EE
.RE
.IP
Within rules qualified
.BR <DOLLAR_QUOTED> ,
the action body reads
.B state_data\->opening_tag
and friends as fields of a typed pointer.
Setting fields at state entry uses an extended transition:
.IP
.RS
.EX
LEX_TRANSITION(DOLLAR_QUOTED, .opening_tag = matched + 1,
                              .opening_tag_len = matched_len \- 2);
.EE
.RE
.IP
The struct is zeroed when the state is exited via
.BR LEX_TRANSITION
to a different state.
.TP
.BI %state_destructor " name " { " C-code " }.
Declare a destructor that runs if the lexer is freed while
in
.IR name 's
state.
The action body sees
.B state_data
as the typed pointer to the state's struct.
.SS "Keyword Tables"
.TP
.B %keyword_table
.BI " name (" " options " ") {" " strings " }.
Declare a first\-class keyword set.
.I options
is a comma\-separated list of:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B case_insensitive
or
.BR case_sensitive
(default
.BR case_sensitive ).
.IP \(bu 2
.BI prefix= IDENT
\(em prefix prepended to each keyword's emitted constant
.RI ( IDENT_SELECT ,
.IR IDENT_FROM ,
\&...).
.RE
.IP
The generator picks a lookup implementation based on table
size: linear scan for \(<= 8 entries, switch+linear for
9\(en64, perfect hash for 65\(en512, trie for >\|512.
The lookup function is exposed as
.BI <name> _lookup() :
.IP
.RS
.EX
%keyword_table sql_kw (case_insensitive, prefix=K_) {
    "select", "from", "where", "as"
}.

rule sql_word matches /[A\-Za\-z_][A\-Za\-z_0\-9]*/ {
    int k = sql_kw_lookup(matched, matched_len);
    if (k >= 0) LEX_EMIT(k);
    else        LEX_EMIT(SQL_RULE_IDENT);
}
.EE
.RE
.IP
At the time of writing, keyword tables parse and round\-trip
through the
.B %name_prefix
pretty\-printer but the compile/emit path is not yet wired
up.
The same effect is reached by declaring each keyword as a
single\-pattern rule; declaration\-order ties keep keywords
ahead of a catch\-all identifier rule.
See
.B EXAMPLES
below.
.SS "Literal Buffers"
.TP
.B %literal_buffer
.BI " name { " " body " " }."
Declare a managed character\-accumulation buffer.
Body fields:
.RS
.TP
.BI type " C-type"
Element type (typically
.B char
or
.BR "unsigned char" ).
.TP
.BI initial " N"
Initial capacity in elements.
.TP
.BI grow " " \fR\(dq\fIpolicy\fR\(dq\fR
Growth policy as a C expression operating on the current
capacity (e.g.
.BR \(dq*2\(dq ,
.BR \(dq+64\(dq ).
.TP
.BI alloc " function"
.PD 0
.TP
.BI realloc " function"
.TP
.BI free " function"
.PD
Names of the C functions used for memory management
(typically
.BR palloc / repalloc / pfree
in PG, or
.BR malloc / realloc / free ).
.RE
.IP
The declaration emits state\-private buffer storage plus
action\-body macros
.BR LEX_BUF_START ,
.BR LEX_BUF_APPEND ,
.BR LEX_BUF_APPEND_CH ,
.BR LEX_BUF_TAKE ,
.BR LEX_BUF_LEN ,
and
.BR LEX_BUF_PEEK .
Replaces the per\-scanner
.BR startlit / addlit / addlitchar / litbufdup
boilerplate.
.SS "Composition"
.TP
.B %ruleset
.BI " name { " " rules " " }."
Group rules into a named, composable set.
Rulesets do not have an entry state of their own; they
contribute their rules into any
.B %lexer
that includes them.
.TP
.BI %lexer_include " name1, name2, ..."  .
Include the named rulesets into the current lexer in order.
The first\-included set wins on length\-tie disambiguation;
two patterns in the same set that match the same input with
the same length is an error.
.SS "Code Blocks"
.TP
.B %include
.BI { " C code " }
Insert C code at the top of the generated source file.
Typically used for
.B #include
directives and helper function definitions referenced from
action bodies.
.SH "ACTION BODY"
The action body is C code with a fixed set of typed locals
and macros bound.
The body is inlined inside the generated
.BR LexFeedBytes ()
function, so any side effects are visible to the surrounding
runtime.
.SS "Locals"
.TP
.B matched
.RB ( "const char *" )
Pointer into the caller's input buffer; the matched text.
NOT null\-terminated.
.TP
.B matched_len
.RB ( size_t )
Length of the matched span.
.TP
.B loc
.RB ( YYLOCATIONTYPE )
Location of the matched span.
.TP
.B lex
.RB ( <PREFIX>_Lexer\ * )
The lexer instance handle.
Pass to runtime API calls
.RB ( "FooLexInclude(lex, ...)"
etc.).
.TP
.B extra
(as declared by
.BR %lexer_extra_argument )
The opaque per\-instance user pointer set at
.BR LexAlloc ()
time.
.TP
.B state
.RB ( int )
Current state code.
Read or write; assigning is equivalent to
.B LEX_TRANSITION(state)
without state\-local\-data init.
.TP
.B state_data
(state's typed struct pointer)
For rules qualified by a state with declared local data:
typed pointer to the state's struct.
.SS "Macros"
.TP
.BI LEX_EMIT( "rule_code" );
Emit a token with the supplied rule id.
.I rule_code
may be a
.BI <PREFIX>_RULE_ NAME
constant or any
.B int
(char literals like
.B '+'
work).
The user's emit callback is invoked once per call.
.TP
.B LEX_SKIP();
Suppress the auto\-emit for this iteration.
The matched bytes are still consumed.
This is the explicit form of flex's
.B ;
"skip" action body.
.TP
.BI LEX_TRANSITION( "state_id" );
Switch to
.IR state_id .
Clears any prior state\-local data.
.TP
.BI LEX_TRANSITION( "state_id" ", " ".field" " = " "value" ", ...);"
Switch and initialise state\-local data using C99 designated
initialisers.
.TP
.BI LEX_PUSHBACK( "n" );
Un\-consume the trailing
.I n
bytes of the just\-matched text so they will be re\-matched
on the next iteration.
Equivalent to flex's
.BI yyless( matched_len - n ).
Bounds\-checked: a pushback that exceeds the available
buffered prefix returns
.B LEX_ERROR
to the caller.
.TP
.B LEX_TERMINATE();
Stop lexing immediately.
The current
.BR LexFeedBytes ()
call returns
.B LEX_OK
with no further emits.
Distinct from emitting an EOF token (which the caller
arranges by pushing a 0 to the parser separately).
.TP
.BI LEX_ERROR_AT( "msg" );
Cause the call to return
.BR LEX_ERROR .
.I msg
is stashed for retrieval via
.BR LexErrorMessage (),
which returns a pointer valid until the next
.BR LexFeed *
call.
.SH "<<EOF>> RULES"
A rule whose pattern is the literal token
.B <<EOF>>
fires when the input ends in the qualifying state(s).
.PP
.RS
.EX
<COMMENT> rule comment_eof matches <<EOF>> {
    LEX_ERROR_AT("unterminated comment");
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
Default behaviour when no
.B <<EOF>>
rule is declared for the current state:
.B INITIAL
returns
.B LEX_OK
(clean end\-of\-input); any other state returns
.B LEX_ERROR
on the assumption that the open construct that switched into
that state should have closed before EOF.
.PP
.B Status:
.B <<EOF>>
rule
.I syntax
parses and the rule is recognised at compile time in
v0.2.
Per\-state action
.I dispatch
on EOF is wired up by milestone M3.6.
Until M3.6 ships, declaring an EOF rule has no runtime effect
beyond the spec'd
.B LEX_ERROR
default for non\-INITIAL states.
.SH "RUNTIME C API"
The generator emits a push\-driven runtime API.
All names are renameable via
.BR %name_prefix ;
the table below uses the default
.B Foo
prefix for clarity.
.TP
.BI "Foo_Lexer *" FooLexAlloc( "void *(*mallocProc)(size_t)" );
Allocate a new lexer instance.
The first argument is a malloc\-shaped function pointer
.RB ( malloc ,
.BR palloc ,
\&...).
Returns
.B NULL
on allocation failure.
.TP
.BI "void " FooLexFree( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, void (*freeProc)(void *)" );
Free a lexer instance.
The second argument is a free\-shaped function pointer.
Safe to pass
.B NULL
for either argument; a
.B NULL
.I yyl
is a no\-op.
.TP
.B FooLexResult
A typedef:
.B FOO_LEX_OK
(0) on clean completion or
.B FOO_LEX_ERROR
(1) on unmatched input, exceeded include depth, pushback
out of bounds, or
.BR LEX_ERROR_AT() .
.TP
.B FooEmitFn
A typedef
.IB ( "void (*)(void *user, int rule, const char *text, size_t len)" )
.
The user's emit callback.
.I user
is the opaque pointer the caller passed to
.BR FooLexFeedBytes ();
.I rule
is one of the
.B FOO_RULE_*
constants;
.IR text / len
point into the caller's input buffer (NOT copied).
.TP
.BI "FooLexResult " FooLexFeedBytes( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, const char *bytes, size_t n, FooEmitFn emit, void *user" );
Feed bytes to the lexer.
Each recognised token invokes
.IR emit (
.IR user ", "
.IR rule_code ", "
.IR text ", "
.IR len ).
Returns
.B FOO_LEX_OK
on clean completion or
.B FOO_LEX_ERROR
on the conditions described above.
.TP
.BI "FooLexResult " FooLexFeedEOF( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, FooEmitFn emit, void *user" );
Signal end of input.
Forces dispatch of any
.B <<EOF>>
rules for the current state (M3.6) and returns
.B FOO_LEX_OK
on clean termination.
.TP
.BI "int " FooLexCurrentState( "const Foo_Lexer *yyl" );
Return the current state code (
.BR FOO_STATE_INITIAL ,
.BR FOO_STATE_X ,
\&...).
Returns \-1 on a NULL handle.
.TP
.BI "void " FooLexSetState( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, int state" );
Caller\-controlled state switch.
The action\-body equivalent is
.BR LEX_TRANSITION ;
this entry point exposes the same primitive for callers
that pick a starting state per feed call (PostgreSQL's
.B exprscan.l
shape).
Does
.B not
initialise state\-local data; if the target state has
local\-data fields, the caller is responsible for setting
them via the
.BR state_data
pointer.
.TP
.BI "FooLexResult " FooLexInclude( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, const char *bytes, size_t n" );
Push a new input source onto the lexer's buffer stack.
The lexer continues from the new source until it hits EOF,
then automatically resumes the parent buffer.
The supplied bytes are
.B not
copied; the caller retains ownership and must keep the
buffer alive until the corresponding pop (observable via
.BR FooLexIncludeDepth() ).
Returns
.B FOO_LEX_ERROR
on
.B NULL
handle or maximum include depth reached
.RB ( FOO_LEX_MAX_INCLUDE_DEPTH ,
default 64).
.TP
.BI "int " FooLexIncludeDepth( "const Foo_Lexer *yyl" );
Number of
.BR FooLexInclude ()
levels currently active.
0 when no include is on the stack.
.TP
.BI "FooLexResult " FooLexPushback( "Foo_Lexer *yyl, size_t n" );
Un\-consume the last
.I n
bytes from the top\-of\-stack buffer.
The action\-body
.B LEX_PUSHBACK
macro delegates to this entry point;
.BR FooLexPushback ()
itself is callable from outside an action body.
Returns
.B FOO_LEX_ERROR
if
.I n
exceeds the available buffered prefix on the current
frame.
.TP
.BI "const char *" FooLexErrorMessage( "const Foo_Lexer *yyl" );
On
.BR FOO_LEX_ERROR ,
return a stable diagnostic string set by the failing rule
(via
.BR LEX_ERROR_AT() )
or by the runtime's bounds checks.
The returned pointer is valid until the next
.BR FooLexFeed *
call or the lexer is freed.
Returns
.B NULL
when no error has been recorded.
.SH "PATTERN LANGUAGE"
Lime patterns are POSIX\-extended regex.
.SS "Constructs"
.TP
.B abc
Literal characters.
.TP
.B [a-z0-9_]
Character class.
.TP
.B [^...]
Negated class.
.TP
.B .
Any byte except newline.
.TP
.B *
.PD 0
.TP
.B +
.TP
.B ?
.PD
Zero\-or\-more, one\-or\-more, optional.
.TP
.BI { n , m }
Bounded repetition.
.TP
.B ( ... )
Grouping (no capture).
.TP
.B |
Alternation.
.TP
.B \e
Escape.
.B \en
.RB \e t ,
.BR \er ,
.BR \ef ,
.BR \ev ,
.B \e0
are recognised C\-style escapes;
.BI \ex { hex }
is a hex byte escape.
.TP
.B ^
Beginning of input (NOT line; lexers do not track lines
specially).
.TP
.B $
End of input.
.PP
The following constructs are
.I not
supported (rejected for v1):
backreferences
.RB ( \e1 ),
named captures
.RB ( "(?P<name>...)" ),
lookahead and lookbehind assertions
.RB ( "(?=...)" ", " "(?<!...)" ),
inline flag modifiers
.RB ( "(?i)..." ),
trailing context
.RB ( pattern1 / pattern2 ),
.B yymore()
behaviour, and
.BR REJECT .
The PG flex audit (six scanners, ~5,300 lines) found zero
uses of any of these.
.SS "Match disambiguation"
Three rules in priority order:
.IP 1. 4
Longest match wins (standard lex/flex semantics).
.IP 2. 4
Within a length tie, declaration order wins (earlier rules
beat later rules).
.IP 3. 4
Across composed rule sets, first\-included set's rules win
on length ties.
.PP
The
.B \-X
output reports cross\-set conflicts in the audit trail.
.SH EXAMPLES
A minimal scanner for arithmetic expressions:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%name_prefix Calc.

%pattern digit /[0\-9]/.

rule ws    matches /[ \et]+/   { LEX_SKIP(); }
rule num   matches /{digit}+/  { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule plus  matches /\e+/       { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule minus matches /\-/        { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule times matches /\e*/       { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule div   matches /\e//       { /* auto\-emit */ }
.EE
.RE
.PP
A stateful scanner for C\-style block comments:
.PP
.RS
.EX
%name_prefix Cmt.

%exclusive_state COMMENT { int depth; }.

rule open  matches "/\e*"  { LEX_TRANSITION(COMMENT, .depth = 1); }
<COMMENT> rule nest_open  matches "/\e*"  { state_data\->depth++; }
<COMMENT> rule nest_close matches "\e*/"  {
    if (\-\-state_data\->depth == 0) LEX_TRANSITION(INITIAL);
}
<COMMENT> rule body matches /([^/*]|\e/[^*]|\e*[^/])+/ { LEX_SKIP(); }
<COMMENT> rule eof  matches <<EOF>>      {
    LEX_ERROR_AT("unterminated comment");
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
The simplest port of PostgreSQL's
.B bootscanner.l
keeps each keyword as a separate rule (declaration\-order
disambiguation against a generic identifier):
.PP
.RS
.EX
%name_prefix Boot.

%pattern id  /[\-A\-Za\-z0\-9_]+/.
%pattern sid /'([^']|'')*'/.

rule whitespace matches /[\er\et ]+/ { LEX_SKIP(); }
rule newline    matches /\en/        { LEX_SKIP(); }
rule comment    matches /#[^\en]*/   { LEX_SKIP(); }

rule comma  matches /,/  { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule lparen matches /\e(/ { /* auto\-emit */ }

rule kw_open      matches /open/      { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule kw_bootstrap matches /bootstrap/ { /* auto\-emit */ }
/* ... 20 more keyword rules ... */

rule ident    matches /{id}/  { /* auto\-emit */ }
rule sqstring matches /{sid}/ { /* auto\-emit */ }

rule unexpected matches /./ {
    LEX_ERROR_AT("syntax error: unexpected character");
}
.EE
.RE
.PP
The full worked example, with a meson\-driven test driver, lives in
.B examples/pg_bootscanner/
in the Lime source tree.
.SH "BUILD INTEGRATION"
.SS meson
.PP
.RS
.EX
foo_lex_gen = custom_target('foo_lexer',
  input   : ['foo.lex'],
  output  : ['foo_lex.c', 'foo_lex.h'],
  command : [lime_exe, '\-X', '\-d@OUTDIR@', '@INPUT@'],
)

executable('foo', ['driver.c'], foo_lex_gen)
.EE
.RE
.SS Make
.PP
.RS
.EX
foo_lex.c foo_lex.h: foo.lex
\&\t$(LIME) \-X \-d. foo.lex
.EE
.RE
.PP
The generated
.IB stem _lex.c
includes
.IB stem _lex.h
by basename only, so the pair can be moved between directories
without editing.
.SH "DRIVER LOOP"
The simplest driver:
.PP
.RS
.EX
static void emit(void *user, int rule,
                 const char *text, size_t len) {
    /* convert text/len to the parser's value type, then: */
    Parse(parser, rule, build_value(text, len));
}

void *lex = FooLexAlloc(malloc);
void *par = FooParseAlloc(malloc);

FooLexResult r = FooLexFeedBytes(lex, src, src_len, emit, par);
if (r == FOO_LEX_OK)
    r = FooLexFeedEOF(lex, emit, par);
Parse(par, 0, eof_value);   /* push EOF to the parser */

FooLexFree(lex, free);
FooParseFree(par, free);
.EE
.RE
.PP
The caller owns the input buffer for its lifetime; the lexer
does
.B not
copy bytes.
.SH "STATUS"
The
.B .lex
source language and the runtime API documented above are spec
v0.2.
The compiler pipeline (parse, resolve, NFA construction, DFA
subset construction, DFA minimisation, action\-body emission,
push\-driven runtime, include stack, pushback) is implemented;
.B <<EOF>>
rule action dispatch is in milestone M3.6;
.B %ruleset
composition,
.BR lime_lexer_to_text ()
introspection, and per\-rule test entry points are in
milestone M4.
Keyword tables and literal buffers parse and round\-trip but
the compile/emit paths are deferred to later milestones.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lime (1),
.BR lime_grammar (5),
.BR flex (1)
.SH AUTHORS
The Lime parser generator is an extension of Lemon (originally
written by D. Richard Hipp for the SQLite project) with support
for modular grammars, runtime extensions, and a push\-driven
lexer subsystem.
.SH LICENSE
Public Domain.
